# イントロダクション

What is maths? I think it can basically be classified into four types of thing. There are definitions, true/false statements, proofs, and ideas.

**Definitions** (for example the real numbers, or $\pi$) and **true/false statements** (for example the statement of Fermat’s Last Theorem or the statement of the Riemann Hypothesis) are part of the science of mathematics: these are black and white things which have a completely rigorous meaning within some foundational system.

**Proofs** are in some sense the currency of mathematics: proofs win prizes. Constructing them is an art, checking them is a science. This explains, very simply, why computer proof verification systems such as Lean, Coq, Isabelle/HOL, Agda… are much better at checking proofs than constructing them.

And **ideas** are the purely artistic part of mathematics. That “lightbulb” moment, the insight which enables you to solve a problem — this is the elusive mathematical idea.

Ideas are the part of mathematics that I understand the least, in a formal sense. Here are two questions:

* What is a group?
* How do you think about groups?

The first one is a precise “scientific” question. A group is a set equipped with some extra structure, and which satisfies some axioms. The formal answer is on [Wikipedia’s page on groups](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_(mathematics)#Definition). A group is a definition. But the second question is a different kind of question. Different people think about groups in different ways. Say $G$ is a group generated by an element x satisfying $x^5=x^8=1$. What can you say about $G$? If you are a mathematics undergraduate who has just seen the formal definition of a group, you can probably say nothing. If you have a more mature understanding of group theory, you instantly know that this group is trivial, because you have a far more sophisticated model of what is going on. Ideas are complicated, and human-dependent. A computer’s idea of what a group is, is literally a copy of the definition in Wikipedia, and this is one of the reasons that computers are currently bad at proving new theorems by themselves. You can develop a computer’s intuition by teaching it theorems about groups, or teaching it examples of groups, or trying to write AI’s which figure out group theory theorems or examples of groups automatically. But intuition is a very subtle thing, and I do not understand it at all well, so I will say no more about these ideas here. I think that the concept of a map being “canonical” is an idea rather than a definition — I think different mathematicians have different ways of thinking about this weasel word. In this post I’m going to talk about how the three other concepts are implemented in type theory, in the Lean theorem prover.