# Definitions, true/false statements, and proofs

In contrast to ideas, the other parts of mathematics (the definitions, theorems/conjectures, and proofs) can be formalised in a foundational system, and hence can be created and stored on a computer in a precise way. By this, I don’t mean a pdf file! Pdf files are exactly what I want to move away from! I mean that people have designed computer programming languages which understand one of the various foundations of mathematics (set theory, type theory, category theory) and then mathematicians can write code in this language which represents the definition, true/false statement or proof in question.

I am certainly not qualified to explain how all this works in category theory. In set theory, let me just make one observation. A definition in set theory, for example the definition of the real numbers, or $\pi$, is a set. And a proof is a sequence of steps in *logic*. A definition and a proof seem to me to be two completely different things in set theory. A group is a mixture of these things — a group is an ordered quadruple $(G,m,i,e)$ satisfying some axioms, so it’s a set with some logic attached.

In type theory however, things are surprisingly different. All three things — definitions, true/false statements, and proofs — are *all the same kind of thing*! They are all **terms**. A group, a proof, the real numbers — they are all terms. This unification of definitions and proofs — of sets and logic — are what seems to make type theory a practical foundational system for teaching all undergraduate level mathematics to computers.