# Universes, types, and terms.

In type theory, everything is a term. But some terms are types. Not every term is a type, but every term has a type. A colon is used to express the type of a term in Lean — the notation `x : T` means that `x` is a term of type `T`. For example, the real number $\pi$ (pi) is a term in Lean, and the real numbers ℝ is a type, and we have $\pi$ : ℝ , that is, $\pi$ is a term of type ℝ. In set theory one writes $\pi\in\mathbb{R}$ , in type theory we write $\pi$ : ℝ. They both express the same mathematical concept, namely “$\pi$ is a real number”.

Now $\pi$ is a term but it’s not a type. In Lean, `x : π` makes no sense. In set theory, $x\in\pi$ does happen to make sense, but this is a weird coincidence because everything is a set. Furthermore, the actual elements of $\pi$ will depend on how the real numbers are implemented (as Dedekind cuts or Cauchy sequences, for example), and hence in set theory $x\in\pi$, whilst being syntactically valid in theory, has no mathematical meaning; it happens to make sense, but this is a quirk of the system. If you’re adamant that $x\in\pi$ should make sense then I say you’ve been brainwashed by set theory. Gauss and Euler will put you right: they were proving theorems about the real numbers before Cauchy and Dedekind came along with their sequences and cuts. There is no reason that $\pi$ needs to have elements, this is a quirk of the set-theoretic foundations of mathematics, and this quirk is eliminated in a type theoretic foundation.

I claimed above that every term has a type. So what is the type of ℝ? It turns out that `ℝ : Type`. The real numbers are a term of a “universe” type called `Type` — the type theory analogue of the class of all sets.

Many of the mathematical objects which mathematicians think of as definitions either have type `Type`, or have type `T` where `T : Type`. As a vague rule of thumb, the stuff which has elements (groups, rings, fields etc) has type `Type`, and the stuff which doesn’t have elements ($\pi$, $\sqrt{2}$ or an element $g$ of a general group) has type `T` where T is some type. As another vague rule of thumb, things we write using capital letters (a group, a ring,…) or fancy letters (the reals, the rationals) tend to have type `Type`, and things we write using small letters (an element g of a group, a real number r or an integer n) tend to have type `T` where T is what we think of as the set which contains these things. For example `2 : ℕ` and `ℕ : Type`, or if $g$ is an element of the group $G$ then in Lean we have `g : G` and `G : Type`. You can see that there is a three-layer hiearchy here — terms at the bottom, types above them, and the universe at the top.

* Universe : `Type`
* Examples of types : `ℝ`, `ℕ`, `G` (a group), `R` (a ring), `X` (something a set theorist would call a set), a Banach space, etc. Formally, we say `ℝ : Type`.
* Examples of terms: `π` (a term of type `ℝ`), `g` (an element of the group `G`, so a term of type `G`), `x` (an element of `X`, so a term of type `X`). Formally, we say `g : G`.

This hierarchy is more expressive than the hierarchy in set theory, where there are only two levels: classes (e.g. the class of all sets), and sets.

There is a standard use of the colon in mathematics — it’s in the notation for functions. If X and Y are sets (if you’re doing set theory) or types (if you’re doing type theory), then the notation for a function from `X` to `Y` is `f : X → Y`. This is actually consistent with Lean’s usage of the colon; Lean’s notation for the collection $\mathrm{Hom}(X,Y)$ of functions from `X` to `Y` is `X → Y` , which is a type (i.e. `X → Y : Type`, corresponding to the fact that set theorists think of $\mathrm{Hom}(X,Y)$ as a set), and `f : X → Y` means that `f` is a term of type `X → Y`, the type-theoretic version of $f \in \mathrm{Hom}(X,Y)$, and the way to say that `f` is a function from `X` to `Y` in type theory.

(Not for exam) Strictly speaking, universes are types, and types are terms, but this is a linguistic issue: often when people speak of types, they mean types which are not universes, and when people speak of terms they mean terms which are not types. But not always. This confused me when I was a beginner.