# Elements of a theorem

So our mental model of the statement `π : ℝ` is that `ℝ`, the type, is “a collection of stuff”, and `π`, the term, is a member of that collection. If we continue with this analogy, it says that the statement `2 + 2 = 4` is some kind of collection, and a proof of `2 + 2 = 4` is a member of that collection. In other words, Lean is suggesting that we model the true/false statement `2 + 2 = 4` as being some sort of a set, and a proof of `2 + 2 = 4` is an element of that set. Now in Lean, it is an inbuilt axiom that all proofs of a proposition are equal. So if `a : 2 + 2 = 4` and `b : 2 + 2 = 4` then `a = b`. This is because we’re working in the `Prop` universe — this is how Propositions behave in Lean. In the `Type` universe the analogue is not remotely true — we have `π : ℝ` and `37 : ℝ` and certainly $\pi\not=37$. This special quirk of the `Prop` universe is called “proof irrelevance”. Formally we could say that if `P : Prop`, if `a : P` and if `b : P` then `a = b`. Of course if a Proposition is false, then it has no proofs at all! It’s like the empty set. So Lean’s model of Propositions is that the true ones are like sets with $1$ element, and the false ones are like sets with $0$ elements.

Recall that if `f : X → Y` then this means that `f` is a function from `X` to `Y`. Now say $P$ and $Q$ are Propositions, and let’s say that we know $P\implies Q$. What does this mean? It means that $P$ implies $Q$. It means that if $P$ is true, then $Q$ is true. It means that if we have a proof of $P$, we can make a proof of $Q$. It is a function from the proofs of $P$ to the proofs of $Q$. It is a function sending an element of $P$ to an element of $Q$. It is a term of type `P → Q`. Again: a proof $h$ of $P\implies Q$ is a term `h : P → Q`. This is why in the natural number game we use the `→` symbol to denote implication.

Let `false` denote a generic false statement (thought of as a set with $0$ elements), and let `true` denote a generic true statement (thought of as a set with $1$ element). Can we construct a term of type `false → false` or a term of type `true → true`? Sure — just use the identity function. In fact, in both cases there is a unique function — the hom sets have size $1$. Can we construct a term of type `false → true`? Sure, there is a function from the set with $0$ elements to a set with $1$ element, and again this function is unique. But can we construct a term of type `true → false`? No we can’t, because where do we send a proof of `true`? There are no proofs of `false` to send it to. So `true → false` is a set of size $0$. This corresponds to the standard truth table for `→`, where the first three statements we analysed were true and the last was false.